README.md, before:

# Lab 02: Using Sockets

## Overview
In this lab, you'll write a simple server application in Python that using the Berkeley sockets API and responds to knock, knock jokes.

### Learning objectives
After completing this lab, you should be able to:
* Use the Berkeley sockets API to send/receive data over the network
* Use netcat to debug a program that uses sockets

## Getting Started
Clone your git repository on a tigers server.

A knock, knock joke has the following sequence:
```
Knock, Knock
Who's there?
WORD
WORD who?
PUNCHLINE
Ha, ha, ha!
```
For example,
```
Knock, Knock
Who's there?
Spell
Spell who?
Okay, S-P-E-L-L
Ha, ha, ha!
```

A client will send the first, third, and fifth lines to the server; the server will send the second, fourth, and sixth lines to the client (after receiving the preceding line).

## Step 1: Establishing a connection
The knock, knock server is started using the following command:
```
./knock.py -p PORT
```
where `PORT` is replaced with the port number (an integer between 1 and 65535) on which the server is waiting for a connection.

Add calls to the appropriate socket functions in the `main` function in `knock.py` to allow a client to connect to the knock, knock server.

### Testing
You can use the program `netcat` to help you test your code. First, start your knock, knock server using a **randomly chosen port number between `5000` and `65000`**. Then, in a separate terminal window, start `netcat` using the following command:
```bash
netcat -v 127.0.0.1 PORT
```
replacing `PORT` with the same port number you specified when you started your knock, knock server.

If your server is working correctly, netcat should output a message similar to the following:
```bash
Connection to 127.0.0.1 5000 port [tcp/*] succeeded!
```

You can end both your knock, knock server and `netcat` using `Ctrl+c.` It may take up to two minutes before you can reuse the same port number, so you **may need to switch port numbers if you run your application multiple times in quick succession**.

## Step 2: Receiving/sending messages
Now, add code to the `handle_client` function in `knock.py` to receive messages from the client and send responses. Your server will need to receive three messages from the client (`Knock, knock`, `WORD`, and `PUNCHLINE`), and send three messages to the client (`Who's there?`, `WORD who?` and `Ha, ha, ha!`). 

It is important that the client and server conform to the "protocol" of a knock, knock joke. In other words, the server should only accept `Knock, knock` as the first message from the client. If the server sends something else, then the server should respond `I don't understand` and close the connection. There is no way to validate the second and third messages from the client (`WORD` and `PUNCHLINE`), so the server should accept whatever text the client sends.

You should also call the appropriate socket function to gracefully terminate the connection after sending the last message (`Ha, ha, ha!`).

Remember to add a call to `handle_client` in `main`.

### Testing
Again, you can use `netcat` to help you test your knock, knock server. Start `netcat` and your knock, knock server as discussed in Step 1. After a connection is established, you should be able to type a message in `netcat`, hit enter, and the server should receive the message. Likewise, when the server sends a message, `netcat` should display the message. 

Note: `netcat` will not automatically end after the server has sent the last line (`Ha, ha, ha!`) and closed the connection. `Ctrl+d` will gracefully terminate `netcat`.

## Step 3: Handling multiple clients
Now, add code to the `main` function in `knock.py` to create a [`ThreadPoolExecutor`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html#concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor). Update `main` to accept connections from clients indefinitely. Each time a client connects, call the `submit` function on the created `ThreadPoolExecutor` to invoke the `handle_client` function for the connected client.

### Testing
Run multiple instances of `netcat` at the same time (in different terminals) to test that your knock, knock server properly handles multiple clients in parallel.

## Self-assessment
The self-assessment for this lab will be available on Moodle after 5pm on Thursday, February 1. Please complete the self-assessment by 11pm on Monday, February 5.

Commit message:

Add reference to class notes

README.md, after:

# Lab 02: Using Sockets

## Overview
In this lab, you'll write a simple server application in Python that using the Berkeley sockets API and responds to knock, knock jokes.

### Learning objectives
After completing this lab, you should be able to:
* Use the Berkeley sockets API to send/receive data over the network
* Use netcat to debug a program that uses sockets

## Getting Started
Clone your git repository on a tigers server.

A knock, knock joke has the following sequence:
```
Knock, Knock
Who's there?
WORD
WORD who?
PUNCHLINE
Ha, ha, ha!
```
For example,
```
Knock, Knock
Who's there?
Spell
Spell who?
Okay, S-P-E-L-L
Ha, ha, ha!
```

A client will send the first, third, and fifth lines to the server; the server will send the second, fourth, and sixth lines to the client (after receiving the preceding line).

As you work on this lab, you may want to refer to the [class notes on sockets](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1EinSzBEAsr6s0y_bcYN7AbT-LtVldwimmaadM4KRVPY/edit#bookmark=id.j3c06wd4xlg5).

## Step 1: Establishing a connection
The knock, knock server is started using the following command:
```
./knock.py -p PORT
```
where `PORT` is replaced with the port number (an integer between 1 and 65535) on which the server is waiting for a connection.

Add calls to the appropriate socket functions in the `main` function in `knock.py` to allow a client to connect to the knock, knock server.

### Testing
You can use the program `netcat` to help you test your code. First, start your knock, knock server using a **randomly chosen port number between `5000` and `65000`**. Then, in a separate terminal window, start `netcat` using the following command:
```bash
netcat -v 127.0.0.1 PORT
```
replacing `PORT` with the same port number you specified when you started your knock, knock server.

If your server is working correctly, netcat should output a message similar to the following:
```bash
Connection to 127.0.0.1 5000 port [tcp/*] succeeded!
```

You can end both your knock, knock server and `netcat` using `Ctrl+c.` It may take up to two minutes before you can reuse the same port number, so you **may need to switch port numbers if you run your application multiple times in quick succession**.

## Step 2: Receiving/sending messages
Now, add code to the `handle_client` function in `knock.py` to receive messages from the client and send responses. Your server will need to receive three messages from the client (`Knock, knock`, `WORD`, and `PUNCHLINE`), and send three messages to the client (`Who's there?`, `WORD who?` and `Ha, ha, ha!`). 

It is important that the client and server conform to the "protocol" of a knock, knock joke. In other words, the server should only accept `Knock, knock` as the first message from the client. If the server sends something else, then the server should respond `I don't understand` and close the connection. There is no way to validate the second and third messages from the client (`WORD` and `PUNCHLINE`), so the server should accept whatever text the client sends.

You should also call the appropriate socket function to gracefully terminate the connection after sending the last message (`Ha, ha, ha!`).

Remember to add a call to `handle_client` in `main`.

### Testing
Again, you can use `netcat` to help you test your knock, knock server. Start `netcat` and your knock, knock server as discussed in Step 1. After a connection is established, you should be able to type a message in `netcat`, hit enter, and the server should receive the message. Likewise, when the server sends a message, `netcat` should display the message. 

Note: `netcat` will not automatically end after the server has sent the last line (`Ha, ha, ha!`) and closed the connection. `Ctrl+d` will gracefully terminate `netcat`.

## Step 3: Handling multiple clients
Now, add code to the `main` function in `knock.py` to create a [`ThreadPoolExecutor`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html#concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor). Update `main` to accept connections from clients indefinitely. Each time a client connects, call the `submit` function on the created `ThreadPoolExecutor` to invoke the `handle_client` function for the connected client.

### Testing
Run multiple instances of `netcat` at the same time (in different terminals) to test that your knock, knock server properly handles multiple clients in parallel.

## Self-assessment
The self-assessment for this lab will be available on Moodle after 5pm on Thursday, February 1. Please complete the self-assessment by 11pm on Monday, February 5.
